3.5 Weak Entity Types

weak entity types - Entity types that do not have key attributes of their own.

regular entity types (strong entity types) - do have a key attribute.

- How are weak entity types identified then?
Entities belonging to a weak entity
type are identified by being related to specific entities from another entity type in com-
bination with one of their attribute values.

called the..
Identifying or owner entity type.

Identifying relationship
relationship type that relates a weak entity type to it's owner.

*Always has a total participation constraint (existence dependency) with respect to it's identifying relationship (can't be identified without an owner entity type).

Not every existence dependency results in a weak entity type*

Example:
Drivers license doesn't exist without a person (existence dependency), but is itself a strong entity type (as it has it's own key).

partial key - the attribute that can
uniquely identify weak entities that are related to the same owner entity.

- Representing in an ER Diagram?
In ER diagrams, both a weak entity type and its identifying relationship are distin-
guished by surrounding their boxes and diamonds with double lines (see Fig-
ure 3.2). The partial key attribute is underlined with a dashed or dotted line.

3.7.2 Proper Naming of Schema Constructs

One should choose names that convey, as much as possible, the meanings attached to
the different constructs in the schema.

Singular names for entity types, rather than plural ones, as entity type name applies to each individual entity belonging to that entity type.

Entity Type and Relationship Type names - all caps (uppercase).

Attribute names - initial letter capitalized.

Role names - lowercase letters.

From a general perspective:
nouns appearing in the narrative tend to give rise to entity type names, and the
verbs tend to indicate names of relationship types. Attribute names generally arise
from additional nouns that describe the nouns corresponding to entity types.

Binary relationship names - make the ER diagram of the schema readable from left to right and from top to bot-
tom.

3.7.3 - Design Choices for ER Conceptual Design

- Iterative refinement process
examples:
- A concept may be first modeled as an attribute and then refined into a rela-
tionship because it is determined that the attribute is a reference to another
entity type. It is often the case that a pair of such attributes that are inverses of
one another are refined into a binary relationship.

- Similarly, an attribute that exists in several entity types may be elevated or
promoted to an independent entity type. For example, suppose that each
of several entity types in a UNIVERSITY database, such as STUDENT,
INSTRUCTOR, and COURSE, has an attribute Department in the
initial design; the designer may then choose to create an entity type
DEPARTMENT with a single attribute Dept_name and relate it to the three
entity types (STUDENT, INSTRUCTOR, and COURSE) via appropriate rela-
tionships. Other attributes/relationships of DEPARTMENT may be discov-
ered later.

- An inverse refinement to the previous case may be applied—for example, if
an entity type DEPARTMENT exists in the initial design with a single attribute
Dept_name and is related to only one other entity type, STUDENT. In
this case, DEPARTMENT may be reduced or demoted to an attribute of
STUDENT.

Java Spring Resources:
https://www.codecademy.com/learn/learn-java
https://www.codecademy.com/learn/learn-spring