
5.2 Relational Model Constraints and Relational Database Schemas

There are generally many
restrictions or constraints on the actual values in a database state.

- model-based (implicit) constraints - Constraints that are inherent in the data model.

- schema-based constraints (explicit) constraints - Constraints that can be directly expressed in the schemas of the data model, typically
by specifying them in the DDL.

- application-based (semantic) constraints or business rules - constraints that cannot be directly expressed in the schemas of the data
model, and hence must be expressed and enforced by the application programs
or in some other way.

First section were model-based constraints.

Side note:
- data dependencies - Another important category of constraints (having to do with normalization).

This section is schema-based constraints (ones that can be specified by the DDL)*

Different schema-based constraints:
domain constraints, key constraints, constraints
on NULLs, entity integrity constraints, and referential integrity constraints.

5.2.1 Domain Constraints
- Domain constraints specify that within each tuple, the value of each attribute A must
be an atomic value from the domain dom(A). We have already discussed the ways in
which domains can be specified in Section 5.1.1. The data types associated with
domains typically include standard numeric data types for integers (such as short
integer, integer, and long integer) and real numbers (float and double-precision float).
Characters, Booleans, fixed-length strings, and variable-length strings are also available,
as are date, time, timestamp, and other special data types. Domains can also be
described by a subrange of values from a data type or as an enumerated data type in
which all possible values are explicitly listed. Rather than describe these in detail here,
we discuss the data types offered by the SQL relational standard in Section 6.1.

5.2.2 Key Constraints and Constraints on NULL Values
recall:
relation - set of tuples (by definition, all elements of a set are distinct).
follows all tuples of a relation must also be distinct.

no two tuples can have the same combination of values for all their attributes.  There are usually other subsets of attributes of a relation schema R with the property that no two tuples in any relation state r of R should have the same combination of values for these attributes.

e.g.
Subset of attributes named SK

t1[SK] != t2[SK].

any such SK is called a superkey of the relation schema R.  a superkey SK specifies a uniqueness constraint

uniqueness constraint - no two distinct tuples in any state r of
R can have the same value for SK.

Every relation has at least one default superkey - what is that superkey? (set of all it's attributes).

key (has no redundancy) - Superkey K of R with the additional property that removing an attribute A from K leaves a set of attributes K' that is not a superkey of R any more.

Satisfies two properties..
1. Two distinct tuples in any state of the relation cannot have identical values
for (all) the attributes in the key. This uniqueness property also applies to a
superkey.
2. It is a minimal superkey—that is, a superkey from which we cannot remove
any attributes and still have the uniqueness constraint hold. This minimality
property is required for a key but is optional for a superkey.

Hence key is a superkey, not vice versa (quiz question)*

